**Mathematical Modeling of the Central Carbohydrate Metabolism in Arabidopsis Reveals a Substantial Regulatory Influence of Vacuolar Invertase on Whole Plant Carbon Metabolism**

Source: http://www.plantphysiol.org/content/153/1/260

Abstract

A mathematical model representing metabolite interconversions in the central carbohydrate metabolism of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) was developed to simulate the diurnal dynamics of primary carbon metabolism in a photosynthetically active plant leaf. The model groups enzymatic steps of central carbohydrate metabolism into blocks of interconverting reactions that link easily measurable quantities like CO2 exchange and quasi-steady-state levels of soluble sugars and starch. When metabolite levels that fluctuate over diurnal cycles are used as a basic condition for simulation, turnover rates for the interconverting reactions can be calculated that approximate measured metabolite dynamics and yield kinetic parameters of interconverting reactions. We used experimental data for Arabidopsis wild-type plants, accession Columbia, and a mutant defective in vacuolar invertase, AtβFruct4, as input data. Reducing invertase activity to mutant levels in the wild-type model led to a correct prediction of increased sucrose levels. However, additional changes were needed to correctly simulate levels of hexoses and sugar phosphates, indicating that invertase knockout causes subsequent changes in other enzymatic parameters. Reduction of invertase activity caused a decline in photosynthesis and export of reduced carbon to associated metabolic pathways and sink organs (e.g. roots), which is in agreement with the reported contribution of vacuolar invertase to sink strength. According to model parameters, there is a role for invertase in leaves, where futile cycling of sucrose appears to have a buffering effect on the pools of sucrose, hexoses, and sugar phosphates. Our data demonstrate that modeling complex metabolic pathways is a useful tool to study the significance of single enzyme activities in complex, nonintuitive networks.

During the last few years, systems biology has become a rapidly expanding interdisciplinary field of research, driven by the need to study complex interactions among components of biological systems (Yuan et al., 2008). Basically, the intention of systems biology is to resolve the relationship between individual entities (e.g. molecules or genes that are part of highly interconnected networks) in order to understand the resulting system behavior (e.g. a phenotype of an organism). To handle complex networks, formal representation by mathematical models is combined with the integration of experimental data for gene expression, protein abundance, metabolite concentration, or other biological parameters. In an iterative process of model development and experimental validation, systems biology will advance system-wide understanding of complex biological networks (Stelling, 2004). The aim of this study was to use experimentally determined steady-state levels of metabolites, measured at various time points over a complete diurnal cycle, to model fluxes of metabolite interconversions, which are difficult to assess at high time resolution. This is achieved by generating a set of differential equations that represent changes in metabolite levels caused by the interconverting reactions.

Representation of biological processes by differential equations has successfully been applied at various levels of biological complexity in plants. Light and dark reactions of photosynthesis have been modeled, and steady-state concentrations of metabolites and electron transport rates could be predicted (Pettersson and Ryde-Pettersson, 1988; Laisk et al., 2006). The Calvin cycle reactions of photosynthesis have been modeled, and flux control coefficients were determined for individual enzymes (Poolman et al., 2000). The circadian clock of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) was modeled using differential equations for interlocked dynamics in the abundance of transcription factors and participating components (Locke et al., 2005, 2006). Furthermore, kinetic modeling was applied to elucidate the factors governing Suc accumulation in sugarcane (Saccharum officinarum; Uys et al., 2007). Mathematical modeling can also be applied to investigate the consequences of gene knockouts and is especially useful when mutated genes are part of complex networks that prevent intuitive understanding of the consequences of individual gene failure. For example, in aliphatic glucosinolate synthesis, knockouts in one of several methylthioalkylmalate synthases generate varying patterns of glucosinolate chain lengths. Simulations using kinetic models revealed that chain length distribution is a function of the ratio, not of absolute activities, of different methylthioalkylmalate synthases (Knoke et al., 2009).

A prominent example of a complex network that, because of branching and metabolite cycling, is no longer traceable by intuition is the central carbohydrate metabolism in plants. As immediate products of photosynthesis, carbohydrates are the most important energy source as well as building blocks for the synthesis of other organic materials. In addition, they are involved in the regulation of fundamental processes like cell division, growth, differentiation, and resource allocation in plants (Koch, 1996; Smeekens, 2000). In the model plant Arabidopsis as well as in many other plant species, starch and Suc represent the main primary products of photosynthesis (Caspar et al., 1985; Geiger et al., 2000; Gibon et al., 2004b).

Hydrolytic cleavage of Suc into hexose monomers is catalyzed by invertase (EC 3.2.1.26) that occurs as three different isoenzymes, vacuolar invertase, cell wall-bound invertase, and neutral invertase, which can be distinguished based on their subcellular localization, solubility, and pH optima (Sturm, 1999; Roitsch and Gonzalez, 2004). While biochemical properties and molecular details of invertases are well known, their importance in plant carbohydrate metabolism is not fully understood. We demonstrate here that mathematical modeling can be employed to investigate the physiological role of vacuolar invertases in carbohydrate metabolism of a plant leaf. Based on measured metabolite levels and CO2-exchange rates, the model computes kinetic parameters for interconverting reactions in order to simulate experimentally determined metabolite dynamics. To reduce complexity, individual enzymatic steps can be combined into blocks of interconversions that directly link the metabolites that have been quantified. In this case, kinetic parameters do not represent individual enzymes but consecutive interconverting steps. The model calculates turnover rates for the metabolites, which cannot be assessed directly from steady-state levels, when branch points or cycles appear in a metabolic pathway. We used modeling of Arabidopsis accession Columbia (Col-0) with artificially reduced invertase activity to emulate a knockout of the main vacuolar invertase, AtβFruct4 (At1G12240), to investigate whether effects of the knockout could be predicted. In parallel, we developed a model based on experimental data for the mutant. Comparison of the simulations revealed consequences of invertase knockout for consecutive enzymatic steps.

# Resources available
From the paper's supplemental data.
  + Files `154443Model_COl_OS1.txt` and `154443Model_inv4S2.txt` contains the mathematical model itself (i.e. functions and its optimized parameters) and the original data used for the optimization;
  + Files `154443OptimizationProcedure_inv4S4.txt` and `154443OptimizationProcedureCol_OS3.txt` describes the optimization procedure.
  
# ara_C_metab
I want to implement an R version of the model described in this paper and test it using my own data.